--- PAGE 1 ---

THE WEST PAKISTAN URBAN RENT RESTRICTION ORDINANCE, 1959
WEST PAKISTAN ORDINANCE NO VI OF 1959.
CONTENTS
Preamble.
Sections.
1. Short title, extent, exception and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Exemption.
4. Determination of fair rent.
5. Case in which further increase in fair rent admissible.
6. Landlord not to claim anything in excess of fair rent.
7. Fine or premium not to be charged for grant, renewal or continuance of
tenancy.
8. Rent which should have been paid may be recovered.
9. Increase of rent on account of payment of rate, etc. of local
authority, but
rent not to be increased on account of payment of other taxes, etc.
10. Landlord not to interfere with amenities enjoyed by the tenant.
11. Conversion of a residential building into a non-residential building.
12. Failure by landlord to make necessary repairs.
1[12-A.Re-imbursement of expenses incurred on repairs under the orders of
a
localauthority.]
13. Eviction of tenant.
1. Inserted vide W.P.OrdNo.XXX of 1960

1[13-A.Tenant to be informed in case of transfer of ownership.]
2[13-B.Eviction of tenants where the landlord is a salaried employee,
widow or
minor orphan.]
14. Decision which have become final not to be re-opened.
15. Appeal.
16. Power to summon and enforce attendance of witnesses, etc.
17. Execution of orders.
18. Landlord and tenant to furnish particulars.
19. Penalties.
20. Power to make rules.
21. Repeal.
22. Revival of certain proceedings.
SCHEDULE
1. Inserted vide Khyber Pakhtunkhwa OrdNo.IX of 1979.
2. Inserted as 13A vide Ordinance No.XXI of 1965 and then renumbered as
13B vide Ordinance No.IX of 1979.

THE WEST PAKISTAN URBAN RENT RESTRICTION
ORDINANCE, 1959

--- PAGE 2 ---

WEST PAKISTAN ORDINANCE NO VI OF 1959.
[23rd February, 1959]
AN
ORDINANCE
to restrict the increase of rent of certain premises within the limits of
urban areas
and the eviction of tenants there from in the province of West Pakistan.
WHEREAS, it is expedient in the public interest to restrict the increase
of Preamble.
rent of certain premises within the limits of urban areas and the eviction
of tenants
therefrom in Province of West Pakistan;
NOW, THEREFORE, in pursuance of the Presidential Proclamation of the
7th day of October, 1958, and having received the previous instructions of
the
President, the Governor of West Pakistan is pleased, in exercise of all
powers
enabling him in that behalf, to make and promulgate the following
Ordinance: —
1. (1) This Ordinance may be called the West Pakistan Urban Rent Short
title, extent,
Restriction Ordinance, 1959. exception and
commencement .
(2) It extends to all the urban areas in the 1[Province of Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa] except 2[* * * * *] 3[the Tribal Areas].
(3) Nothing contained in this Ordinance shall be deemed to affect any
evacuee property as defined in the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee
Property)
Act, 1957.
(4) Sub-section (5) of section 13 and section 19 shall come into force at
once and the remaining provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed to
have taken
effect on and from the date of expiry of the 4[West Pakistan Urban Rent
Restriction
Act, 1957.]
1. In sub-section, 25 section-1, for the words ―West Pakistan‖, these
words ―North-Words ―North-West Frontier Province‖,
subs, by Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Adapt Order, 1975 and then subs vide Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Act No. IV of 2011.
2. The Words ―the Federal Capital and‖ omitted by West Pakistan Ordinance
No. XXXVIII of 1962.
3. In sub-section (2) of section-1, for the words ―Special Areas‖, the
words Tribal Areas‖ subs. by W. P. Adaptation of Laws
Order, 1964.
4. The W. P. Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1957, expired on the 15th of
January, 1958.

--- PAGE 3 ---

2. In this Ordinance unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or
Definitions.
context —
(a) ―building‖ means any building or part of a building let for any
purpose, whether being actually used for that purpose or not,
including any land, godowns, out-houses, together with furniture let
therewith but does not include a room in a ―Sarai ‖, hotel, hostel or
boarding house;
(b) ―Controller‖ means a judicial officer who is appointed by the
1Provincial Government to perform the functions of a Controller
under this Ordinance;
(c) ―landlord‖ means any person for the time being entitled to receive
rent in respect of any building or rented land whether on his own
account or on behalf or for the benefit of any other person, or as a
trustee, guardian, receiver executor or administrator for any other
person, and includes a tenant who sublets any building or rented land
in the manner hereinafter authorized and every person from time to
time deriving title under a landlord;
(d) ―non-residential building‖ means a building being used solely for the
purpose of business or trade;
(e) ―prescribed‖ means prescribed by rules made under this Ordinance;
(f) ―rented land‖ means any land let separately for the purpose of being
used principally for business or trade;
(g) ―residential building‖ means any building which is not a non-
residential building;
(h) ―scheduled building‖ means a residential building which is being
used by a person engaged in one or more of the professions specified
in the schedule to this Ordinance, partly for his business and partly
for this residence;
(i) ―tenant‖ means any person by whom or on whose account rent is
payable for a building or rented land and includes (a) a tenant
continuing in possession after the termination of the tenancy in his
1. All Senior Subordinate Judges and Subordinate Judges in Quetta, all
Civil Judges in Kalat Division and all First and
Second Class Civil Judges and Subordinate Judges in the rest of the areas
of the Province have been appointed to perform
the function of Controllers, see Gazette of West Pakistan 1959,
Extraordinary, Page 167.

favour and (b) the wife and children of a deceased tenant, but does
not include a person placed in occupation of a building or rented
land by its tenant, unless with the consent in writing of the landlord,
or a person to whom the collection of rent orfees in a public market,
cart-stand, or slaughter-house or of rents for shops has been farmed
out or leased by 1[a Municipal Corporation, a Municipal Committee,
Town Committee, the Provincial Urban Development Board or any
authority subordinate to it;]

--- PAGE 4 ---

2[(j) ―Urban area‖ means an area Administered by a Municipal
Corporation, a Municipal Committee or a Town Committee].
3. Government 3[or an officer authorized by it in this behalf] may direct
by a Exemption.
4[notification published in the Gazette that all or any of the provisions
of this
Ordinance shall not apply to any particular building or rented land or any
class or
buildings or rented lands.
5[4. – (1) The Controller shall, on an application by the tenant or
landlord of a Determination
building or rented land, fix fair rent for such building or rented land
after holding of fair rent.
such enquiry as the Controller thinks fit.
(2) The fair rent shall be fixed after taking into consideration the
following
factors;
(a) the rent of the same building or similar accommodation in similar
circumstances prevailing in the locality during the period of twelve
months prior to the date of making the application;
(b) the rise the cost of construction and in the repairing charges;
(c) the imposition of new taxes after the building or rented land was
rented out; and
1. Subs.by Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Ordinance No.IX of 1979.
2. Cause (j), subs. by Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Ord.No. IX of 1979.
3. In Section -3, after the word ―Government, the word or an officer
authorized by it in this behalf‖, ins. by W.P Ord. No. VI
of 1970.
4. The following properties have been exempted from the provisions of the
Ordinance :-
(i) Properties under the control and management of the Charitable
Institutions Department, Peshawar.
(ii) Properties attached to the Dayal Singh College, Trust Society,
Lahore, and,
(iii) Buildings and rented lands, administration control, management and
maintenance where of is taken over and
assumed by the Chief Administrator of Auqaf. West Pakistan, under s.6 of
the W.P Waqf Properties Ordinance,
1959.
See Gazette of West Pakistan 1959, Extraordinary pages 429 and 665, and
ibid, 1960 Part I, pages 241.
5. Section-4 , subs. by Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Ord No. IX of 1979.

(d) the rental value of the building or rented land entered in the
Property
Tax Assessment Register of the Taxation Department or the Local
Authority relating to the period mentioned in clause (a), if any:

--- PAGE 5 ---

Provided that the increase in the rent to be fixed under this section
shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the rent being paid by the tenant
on
the date of the filling of the application under sub-section (1).
(3) The fair rent fixed under this section shall be payable by the tenant
from a date to be fixed by the Controller not earlier than the date of
filing the
application.]
1[5 (1) When the fair rent of a building or rented land has been fixed
under Case in which
section 4, or where the rent of any building or rented land has been
determined by further increase
in fair rent
an agreement between the landlord and the tenant, no further increase in
such fair
permissible.
rent shall, during the continuance of tenancy, be permissible within a
period of
three years from the date fixed by the Controller under sub-section (3) of
section 4,
or, as the case may be, from the date of the agreement, except in cases
where some
addition, improvement or alteration has been carried out at the landlord’s
expense,
and at the request of the tenant.
(2) The fair rent as increased on grounds of some addition, improvement or
alteration made permissible under this section shall not exceed the fair
rent payable
under this Ordinance for a similar building or rented land in the same
locality with
such addition, improvement or alteration and it shall not be chargeable
until such
addition, improvement or alteration has been completed.
(3) Any dispute between the landlord and tenant in regard to any increase
claimed on grounds of some addition, improvement or alteration made
permissible
under this section shall be decided by the Controller.]
6. (1) Save as provided in section 5, when the Controller has fixed the
fair Landlord not to
rent of a building or rented land under section 4 – claim anything
in aexcess of
fair rent.
(a) the landlord shall not claim or receive any premium of other like sum
in
addition to fair rent, or any rent in excess of such fair rent; but the
landlord may stipulate for and receive in advance an amount not
exceeding one month’s rent;

--- PAGE 6 ---

1. Section-5, subs. by Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Ord. No.IX of 1979.

(b) any agreement for the payment of any sum in addition to rent or of
rent
in excess of such fair rent shall be null and void 1[;]
2[(c)any sum in excess of the fair rent paid in respect of any use or
occupation of
the building or rented land from the date of application for the fixation
of fair rent
shall be refunded to the person by whom it was paid or at the option of
such
person, otherwise adjusted.]
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to the recovery of any rent which
became due before the 1st of January, 1950.
7. (1) No landlord shall, in consideration of the grant, renewal or
continuance of Fine or
a tenancy of any building or rented land, require the payment of any fine,
premium premium not to
be charged for
or any other like sum in addition to the rent.
grant, renewal
or continuance
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to any payment under any
subsisting of tenancy.
agreement entered into before the 1st day of January, 1950.
8. (1) Where any sum has, before the date of publication of this Ordinance
been Rent which
paid by the tenant, which sum is by reason of the provisions of this
Ordinance should not have
been paid may
irrecoverable, such sum may, without prejudice to any other method of
recovery, be
be recovered.
deducted by the tenant by whom it was paid, or by his legal
representative, from
any rent payable by him to such landlord or to his legal representative;
Provided that the tenant before making such deduction obtains the approval
of the Controller by an application made to him within six months of the
said date.
Explanation –In computing the said period of six months the time spent
after the date of the payment, in the proceedings for determination of
fair rent shall
be excluded.
(2) In this section the expression ―legal representative‖ has the same
meaning as in
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and includes, in the case of joint
family

--- PAGE 7 ---

property, the joint family of which the deceased person was a member.
9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this
Increase of rent
Ordinance, a landlord shall, subject to the approval of the Controller, be
entitled to on account of
payment of rate,
increase the rent of a building or rented land if after the commencement
of this
etc., of local
Ordinance a fresh rate, cess or tax is levied in respect of the building
or rented land
1. In clause (b) at the end for the full-stop, the semi-colon, subs. by
W.P. Ord. No. XXI of 1965, s. 3.
2. Clause (c), ins, by ibid.

by 1[Government or] any local authority, or if there is an increase in the
amount of authority, but
such a rate, cess or tax being levied at the commencement of this
Ordinance: rent not to be
increased on
account of
payment of
other taxes, etc.
Provided that the increase in rent shall not exceed one half of the amount
of
any such rate, cess or tax or the amount of the increase in such rate,
cess or tax, as
the case may be.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
in
force or any agreement, no landlord shall recover from his tenant the
amount of any
tax or any portion thereof in respect of any building or rented land
occupied by
such tenant by any increase in the amount of the rent payable, or
otherwise, save as
provided in sub-section (1).
10. 2[(1) No landlord or his Contractor, workman, or servant shall,
without the landlord not to
previous consent of the Controller or save for the purpose of effecting
repairs or interfere with
complying with a requisition from 3[a Municipal Corporation, a Municipal
amenities
enjoyed by the
Committee, a Town Committee, or the Provincial Urban Development Board]
tenant.

--- PAGE 8 ---

willfully disturb any convenience or easement annexed to the premises or
remove,
destroy or render unserviceable anything provided for permanent use
therewith or
discontinue or cause to be discontinued any supply or service comprised in
the fair
rent.]
(2) A tenant in occupation of a building or rented land may, if the
landlord
has contravened the provisions of this section, make an application of the
Controller complaining of such contravention.
(3) If the Controller, on inquiry, finds that the tenant has been in
enjoyment of the amenities and that they were cut off or withheld by the
landlord
without just or sufficient cause, he shall make an order directing the
landlord to
restore such amenities.
11. No person shall convert a residential building into a non-residential
building, Conversion of a
except with the permission in writing of the Controller. residential
building into a
nonresidential
building.
12. If a landlord fails to make the necessary repairs other than
structural Failure by
Landlord to
1. Ins. by W. P. Ord No.XXX of 1960.
2.Sub-Section (1) of Section 10 sub vide W. P. Ord. No. XXI of 1965.
3. Subs, by Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Ord. No.IX of 1979.

alterations, to a building, it shall be competent for the Controller to
direct, on make necessary
application by the tenant and after such inquiry as the Controller may
think repairs.
necessary, that such repairs may be made by the tenant, and that the cost
thereof
may be deducted from the rent which is payable by him.
1[12-A. (1) Where a local authority, in exercise of its functions under
any law for Re-
the time being in force, directs the owner of a building to make such
repairs to the imbursement of
expenses
building as may be specified and on failure of the owner to comply with
such
incurred on
direction the tenant is directed to make the said repairs, the tenant may
comply with

--- PAGE 9 ---

repairs under
the direction. the orders of a
local authority.
(2) The account of the expenses incurred by the tenant under sub-section
(1) shall be submitted to the local authority concerned, which shall,
after due
verification, certify the cost of repairs and the tenant may thereon
deduct the
amount so certified from the rent payable by him.]
13. (1) A tenant in possession of a building or rented land shall not be
evicted Eviction of
there from in execution of a decree passed before or after the
commencement of tenant.
this Ordinance, or otherwise, and whether before or after the termination
of the
tenancy, except in accordance with the provisions of this section 2[or as
the case
may be, section 13-A.]
(2) A landlord who seeks to evict his tenant shall apply to the Controller
for
a direction in that behalf. If the Controller, after giving the tenant a
reasonable
opportunity of showing cause against the application, is satisfied that —
(i) the tenant has not paid or tendered rent due by him in respect of
the building or rented land, within fifteen days after the expiry of
the time fixed in the agreement of tenancy with his landlord, or
in the absence of any such agreement, 3[within sixty days from
the period] for which the rent is payable; or
(ii) the tenant has, without the written consent of the landlord,—
(a) transferred his right under the lease or sub-let the entire
building or rented land or any portion thereof; or
1. Ins. by W. P. Ord. No.XXX of 1960.
2.Inserted by Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Ord No.IX of 1979.
3. Subs by W. P. Ord. XXX of 1960.

(b) used the building or rented land for a purpose other than that
for which it was leased; 1[or has infringed any condition of
the tenure on which the building or rented land is held by the
landlord] or
(iii) the tenant has committed such acts as are likely to impair
materially the value or utility of the building or rented land; or
(iv) the tenant has been guilty of such acts and conduct as are a
nuisance to the occupants of buildings in the neighborhood; or
(v) where the building is situated in a place other than a hill-station,
the tenant has ceased to occupy the building for a continuous
period of four months without reasonable cause; or
2[(vi) the building or rented a land is reasonably and in good faith

--- PAGE 10 ---

required by the landlord for the reconstruction or erection of a
building on the site, and the landlord has obtained the necessary
sanction for the said reconstruction or erection from the 3[Municipal
Corporation, the Municipal Committer, the Town Committee or the
Provincial Urban Development Board for the area where such
building or rented land is situated].
the Controller may make an order directing the tenant to put the
landlord in possession of the building or rented land and if the
Controller in
not so satisfied he shall make an order rejecting the application:
Provided that the Controller may give the tenant a reasonable time
for putting the landlord in possession of the building or rented land and
may
extend such time so as not exceed four months in the aggregate;
4[Provided further that where the application made by the landlord is on
the
ground mentioned in clause (i) and the tenant on the first date of hearing
admits
liability to pay the rent due from him, the Controller shall, if he is
satisfied that the
tenant has not made such default on any previous occasion, direct the
tenant to
deposit all the rent due from him on or before a date to be fixed for the
purpose,
and upon such deposit being made he shall make an order rejecting the
application.
5[Explanation –For the purpose of clause (i) —
1. Ins, by W.P. Ord. No. XXI of 1965.
2. Subs by Ord ibid.
3.Subs by Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Ordinance No.IX of 1979.
4. Proviso ins by Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Act No. III of 1972.
5. Subs. for the original explanation by W. P. Ord. No XXX of 1960.

(i) where the water charges or electricity charges or both are payable by
the tenant to the landlord such charges shall be deemed to be rent;
(ii) rent remitted by money-order to the land lord or deposited in the
office
of the Controller having jurisdiction in the area where the building or
rented land is situated shall be deemed to have been duly tendered.]
(3) (a) A landlord may apply to the Controller for an order directing the
tenant
to put the landlord in possession —
(i) in the case of a residential building, if —
(a) he requires it in good faith for this own occupation or for the
occupation of any of his children;
(b) he is not occupying another residential building, suitable for his
needs at the time, in the same urban area in which such building is

--- PAGE 11 ---

situated; and
(c) he has not vacated such a building without sufficient cause after the
commencement of this Ordinance in the said urban area;
(ii) in the case of a non-residential building or a scheduled building or
rented land, if –
(a) he requires it in good faith for this own use or for the use of any of
his 1[ * * * ] children;
(b) he or his said child is not occupying in the same urban area in which
such building is situated for the purpose of his business any other
such building or rented land, as the case may be, suitable for his
needs at the time; and
(c) he has not vacated such a building or rented land without sufficient
cause after the commencement of this Ordinance, in the said urban
area:
Provided that where the tenancy is for a specified period agreed upon
between the landlord and the tenant the landlord shall not be entitled to
apply under this sub-section before the expiry of such period:
1. Omitted vide Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Ordinance No.III of 1985 .

Provided further that where the landlord had obtained possession of
a residential, scheduled or non-residential building or rented land under
the
provisions of sub-paragraph (i) or sub-paragraph (ii) he shall not be
entitled
to apply again under the said sub-paragraphs for the possession of any
other
building of the same class or rented land unless such residential,
scheduled
or non-residential building or land is no longer suitable for his needs at
the
time.
(b) The Controller shall, if he is satisfied that the claim of the
landlord
is bona fide, make an order directing the tenant to put the landlord in
possession of
the building or rented land on such date as may be specified by the
Controller and if
the Controller is not so satisfied, he shall make an order rejecting the
application:
Provided that the Controller may give the tenant a reasonable time for
putting the landlord in possession of the building or rented land and may
extend
such time so as not to exceed four months in the aggregate:
1[Provided further that if the application is in respect of a residential
building, the Controller shall direct the tenant within four weeks of the
application

--- PAGE 12 ---

to put the landlord in possession of the building if, after as summary
enquiry, he is
satisfied that the tenant, his wife or any of his dependent children owns
a residential
building within the same urban area or owned such a building within sixty
days
preceding the commencement of the West Pakistan Urban Rent Restriction
(Amendment) Act, 1963.]
(4) Where a landlord who has obtained possession of a building or rented
land in pursuance of an order made under sub-paragraph (i) or
sub-paragraph (ii) of
paragraph (a) of sub-section (3) does not himself or where the building
has been got
vacated for the occupation of any of his children, such child does not
occupy it
within one month of the date of obtaining possession, 2[or having been so
occupied
is re-let within two months of the said date to any person other than the
original
tenant,] the tenant who has been evicted may apply to the Controller for
an order
directing that he shall be restored to possession of such building or
rented land and
the Controller shall make an order accordingly.
(5) Where a landlord has obtained possession of a building in pursuance of
an order under clause (vi) of sub-section (2) of this section and does not
have the
building demolished within a period of four months from the date of taking
possession of the same or does not construct the new building within a
further
period of two years after the expiry of the period of four months from the
date of
taking possession of the same, he shall, unless he satisfies the Court
that he was
unable to construct the building within the prescribed time for reasons
beyond his
1. The proviso added by W. P. Act, No. V of 1963, s. 2.
2. Inserted vide W.P Ordinance No.XXI of 1965.

control, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months
or with fine or with both.
1[(5-A) Where a landlord has been convicted under the provisions of sub-
section (5), the tenant, who has been evicted from the building or rented
land in
respect of which the landlord is convicted, may apply to the Controller
for an order

--- PAGE 13 ---

directing that he shall be restored to possession of such building or
rented land, and
except in the case of a building which has been demolished, the Controller
shall
make an order accordingly.
(5-B) Where in pursuance of an order under clause (vi) of sub-section (2),
a
landlord has obtained possession of a building (in this sub-section
referred to as the
old building), and constructs a new building on the same site, the tenant
who was
evicted from the old building may, before the completion of the new
building and
its occupation by another person, apply to the Controller for an order
directing that
he be put in possession of such area in the new building as does not
exceed the area
of the old building of which he was in occupation, and the Controller
shall make an
order accordingly in respect of the area applied for or such smaller area,
as
considering the location and type of the new building and the needs of the
tenant, he
deems just, and on payment of rent to be determined by him on the basis of
rent of
similar accommodation in the locality.]
(6) In proceedings under this section on the first date of hearing or as
soon
as possible after that date and before issues are framed, the Controller
shall direct
the tenant to deposit all the rent due from him and also to deposit
regularly till the
final decision of the case, before the 2[fifteenth] day of each month, the
monthly
rent due from him. If there is any dispute about the amount of rent due or
the rate of
rent, the Controller shall determine such amount approximately and direct
that the
same be deposited by the tenant before a date to be fixed for the purpose.
If the
tenant makes default in the compliance ofsuch an order, then if he is the
petitioner,
his application shall be dismissed summarily and if he is the respondent,
his defence
shall be struck off and the landlord put in to possession of the property
without
taking further proceedings in the case.

--- PAGE 14 ---

3[The Controller shall finally determine the amount of rent due from the
tenant and direct that the same be paid to the landlord, subject to
adjustment of the
approximate amount deposited by the tenant.]
(7) Where the Controller is satisfied that any application made by a
landlord
for the eviction of a tenant is frivolous or vexatious, the Controller may
direct that
compensation not exceeding ten times the monthly rent be paid by such
landlord to
the tenant.
1. Ins. by W. P. Ord. No.XXI of 1965.
2. Subs vide Ordinance ibid.
3. Add: by W. P. Ord No. XXX of 1960.

(8) The rent deposited by the tenant under this section shall, subject to
the
final determination of rent as payable by the tenant, be paid to the
landlord at the
conclusion of the proceedings or on such earlier date as may be specified
by the
Controller.
1[13-A (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance or any
other law Eviction of
for the time beingin force — tenants where
the landlord is a
salaried
(a) in a case where the landlord has died; or employee,
widow or minor
(b) in a case where the landlord is a salaried employee and has retired or
orphan.
is due to retire within a period of six months, a notice in writing may
be given by such landlord or the widow or, as the case may be,
minor child of the deceased landlord, to the tenant of a residential
building informing him that he or she needs the building for personal
use and requiring him to deliver vacant possession of the building
within a period of two months from the date of receipt of the notice.
(2) The right to seek ejectment under sub-section (1) shall also be
available
to a landlord of a residential building who is the wife, husband or a
minor child of a
salaried employee, referred to in, sub-section (1).
(3) In the case of a landlord referred to in sub-section (1) or
sub-section (2),
who happens to be a landlord of more than one residential building,
whether or not

--- PAGE 15 ---

in the same locality, action as provided for in this section shall be
competent in
respect of one of such residential buildings only.
(4) A landlord referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1), or in
sub-section
(2), who is in occupation of a residential building owned by him, shall
not be
entitled to seek ejectment of a tenant from a residential building
situated in the
locality in which the building in occupation of the landlord is situated
unless he
offers the building in his occupation in exchange of the building in
possession of
the tenant on such terms and conditions and on payment of such rent as may
be
determined by the Controller:
Provided that the benefit of exchange shall not be available to the tenant
who refuses to accept the offer or the terms and conditions and the rate
of rent
determined by the Controller.
1. Section 13-A inserted vide Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Ord No, IX of 1979.

(5) A tenant who on receipt of the notice referred to in to sub-section
(1),
fails to deliver vacant possession of the building to the landlord or to
the widow or
minor child of the deceased landlord with in the time allowed in the
notice shall be
liable to be ejected summarily by the Controller on an application being
made to
him in this behalf:
Provided that no application under this section shall be maintainable, it
is
made after six months from the date of the death of the landlord or, in
the case of
the retirement of a salaried person, before six months from or after six
months of
the date of his retirement:
Provided further that, in a case where the landlord has died or a salaried
person has retired before the commencement of this Ordinance, an
application may
by made within a period of six months from the date of such commencement.
Explanation. —In computing the period of six months from the date of the
death of the landlord or from the date of retirement of a salaried person,
the period
of notice mentioned in sub-section (1) shall be excluded.
(6) On an application being made to him under sub-section (5) the

--- PAGE 16 ---

Controller shall issue a notice to the tenant and on being satisfied with
the bona
fide of the request of the landlord or the widow or minor child of a
deceased
landlord, shall order summary ejectment of the tenant.
(7) A landlord or a widow or minor child of a deceased landlord referred
to
in sub-section (1), or sub-section (2), who, within one year of his having
obtained
possession of a building as provided for in sub-section (6), relets the
building to any
person other than the previous tenant, shall be punishable with fine which
may
extend tofive thousand rupees unless the benefit derived by the landlord
is greater
than the amount of fine in which case it shall be equal to the annual rent
obtained by
him by re-letting the building.
(8) The notice referred to in sub-section (1), or sub-section (2) may, in
the
case of landlord who is a minor, be given by the guardian of the said
minor].
1[13-B. Where the ownership of a building in the possession of a tenant or
rented Tenant to be
land has been transferred by way of sale, gift, inheritance or in any
other manner, informed in
case of transfer
whatsoever, from one person to another, the new owner shall send an
intimation of
of owner ship.
such transfer in writing by registered post, to the tenant of such
building or rented
land, and the tenant shall not be deemed to have defaulted in the payment
of rent
for the purposes of clause (i) of sub-section (2) of section 13, if the
rent due is paid
within thirty days from the date when the intimation should in the normal
course
have reached him.
1. Inserted as 13A vide OrdNo.XXI of 1965 and then renumbered as Section
13B vide OrdNo.IX of 1979.

14. The Controller shall summarily reject any application under
sub-section (2) or Decisions
under sub-section (3) of section 13 which raises substantially the same
issues as which have
become final

--- PAGE 17 ---

have been finally decided in a former proceeding under this Ordinance.
not to be re-
opened.
1[15. Appeal. —1) Any party aggrieved by an order made by the Controller
under Appeal.
section 4, section 10, section 12 or section 13 may, within thirty days of
the date of
such order, prefer an appeal in writing to the District Judge having
jurisdiction over
the area where the building or rented land, in relation to which the order
is passed,
is situated;
Provided that no appeal shall lie against an order made by a Controller
under
sub-section (6) of section 13 determining approximately the amount of rent
due or
the rate of rent and directing the tenant to deposit all the rent due;
Provided further that no appeal shall lie from an inter-locutoryorder
passed
by the Controller.
(2) On such appeal being preferred, the District Judge may hear in it
himself or refer it for disposal to an Additional District Judge having
jurisdiction
over the area where the building or rented land, in relation to which the
order is
passed, is situated.
(3) The District Judge may recall an appeal made over by him to an
Additional District Judge and either hear it himself or refer it for
disposal to another
Additional District Judge having jurisdiction as provided in sub-section
(2).
(4) On such appeal being preferred, the appellate authority may stay the
operation of the order appealed against.
(5) The appellate authority admitting an appeal for hearing shall have the
same powers to direct the tenant to deposit the rent as are vested in the
Controller
under this Ordinance and, if the tenant makes default in compliance with
such an
order, then, if he is the appellant, his appeal shall be dismissed
summarily and, if
he is the respondent, his defence shall be struck off.
(6) The appellate authority shall decide the appeal after sending for the
record of the case from the Controller and after giving the parties an
opportunity of
being heard and, if necessary, after making such further inquiry as it
thinks fit,
either personally or through the Controller.

--- PAGE 18 ---

1. Subs by N.W.F.P. Ord. No.IX of 1979.

(7) The order of the Controller, subject to the result of appeal, if any,
shall
be final and shall not be called in question in any Court including the
High Court,
by suit, appeal or otherwise.]
1[15-A. On the application of any of the parties and after notice to the
parties and after hearing such of them as desire to be heard, or of its on
motion
without such notice.
(a) the appellate authority may at any stage withdraw any application
pending with a Controller subordinate to it and transfer the same for
disposal to any other Controller subordinate to it and competent to
try or dispose of the same;
(b) the High Court may at any stage withdraw any appeal pending with
any appellate authority and transfer the same for disposal to any
other appellate authority subordinate to it and competent to dispose
of the same].
16. (1) For the purposes of this Ordinance an appellate authority or a
Controller Power to summon
and enforce
appointed under this Ordinance shall have the same powers of summoning and
attendance of
enforcing the attendance of witnesses and compelling the production of
evidence as
witnesses, etc.
are vested in a Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
(2) The Controller shall for the purpose of section 480 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1898, be deemed to be a Court.
17. Every order made under section 10 or section 13, or section 2[13-A]
and every Execution of
order passed on appeal under section 15 shall be executed by a Civil Court
having orders.
jurisdiction in the area as if it were a decree of that Court.
18. Every landlord and every tenant of a building or rented land shall be
bound to Landlord and
furnish to the Controller, or any person authorized by him in that behalf
such tenant to furnish
particulars.
particulars in respect of such building or rented land as may be
prescribed.
19. (1) If any person contravenes any of the provision of sub-section (1)
of Penalties.
section 10, section 11 or section 18, he shall be punished with fine which
may
extend to one thousand rupees.

--- PAGE 19 ---

(2) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence under this section except
upon —
(a) a complaint of facts which constitute such offence filed with the
sanction of the Controller in writing; or
1. Ins by W. P. Ord. No. XXXII of 1962. s. 2.
2. Ins by N. W. F. P. Ord. No. IX of 1979.

(b) a report in writing of such facts made by the Controller.
20. Government may by notification, make rules for the purpose of carrying
out Power to make
all or any of the provisions of this Ordinance. rules.
21. (1) The following enactments are hereby repealed: — Repeal.
(i) 1[* * *]
(ii) the 2[Khyber Pakhtunkhwa]House Control Act, 1956;
3[(iii) ;
(iv) * * *]
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the enactments mentioned in sub-section
(1) and the expiry of West Pakistan Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1957,—
(a) any order made by Controller or Rent Controller or any Court or
appellate or revisional authority in any proceeding under any of the
said enactments before the commencement of this Ordinance 4[* * *]
shall be deemed to have effect as an order under this Ordinance;
(b) all proceedings which immediately before the commencement
Ordinance were pending with any Controller or appellate authority
under the West Pakistan Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1957, shall
stand transferred to and be continued before the Controller or the
appellate authority, as the case may be, appointed under this
Ordinance, as if the same were instituted underthe provisions of this
Ordinance and any order made in any such proceedings as aforesaid
shall for all purposes have effect as an order made under this
Ordinance.
22. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other
law for Revival of
the time being in force if, as a result of the expiry of the West Pakistan
Urban Rent certain
proceedings.
Restriction Act, 1957 (hereinafter called the said Act), an application or
an appeal
or revision filed under the provisions of the said Act, has, after the
date of such
expiry and before the date of publication of this Ordinance in the
Official Gazette,
been dismissed otherwise than on merits, consigned to the record room or
stayed,
whether such dismissal, consignment or stay was with or without the
consent of the

--- PAGE 20 ---

1. In section-21, in sub-clause (i) omitted by Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
Adaptation Order, 1975.
2.Subs vide Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Act NO. IV of 2011.
3.Omitted vide Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Adaptation Order, 1975.
4. Omitted vide Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Adaptation Order, 1975.

parties, it shall be restored on an application made in this behalf within
sixty days
of the said date by any party to the proceedings. On such, restoration the
proceedings shall start from the stage at which they were at the time of
the
aforesaid dismissal consignment or stay.
(2) If in an application or appeal decided under the provisions of the
said Act
before the date of its expiry, the period of limitation for filing an
appeal or an
application for revision was subsisting on the aforesaid date, any party
aggrieved by
the decision may, within sixty days of the date of publication of this
Ordinance
prefer an appeal in accordance with the provisions of section 15 as if the
decision
was made under this Ordinance by the Controller or the appellate
authority, as the
case may be.
S C H E D U L E
1. Lawyer.
2. Architect.
3. Dentist.
4. Engineer.
5. Veterinary Surgeon.
6. Medical Practitioner including practitioner of indigenous system of
medicine.
